


Datatips
~~~~~~~~


+ `datatipCreate`_ Create a data tip on a polyline by program
+ `datatipGetEntities`_ Get all the entities compatible with datatips
  in the given axes.
+ `datatipGetStruct`_ Retreive the datatips data structure from the
  polyline entity.
+ `datatipInitStruct`_ Initialize the datatip structure associated
  with the given polyline.
+ `datatipManagerMode`_ Set or toggles the data tips mode.
+ `datatipMove`_ Move a specified datatip using the mouse.
+ `datatipRedraw`_ Redraw all datatips after a 3D rotation to adjust
  their positions
+ `datatipRemove`_ Removes a selected datatip
+ `datatipRemoveAll`_ Removes all datatips on a set of polylines.
+ `datatipSetDisplay`_ Set the function used to compute the datatip
  string.
+ `datatipSetInterp`_ Set the interpolation mode for tip location.
+ `datatipSetOrientation`_ Set the position of the text box associated
  with the given tip.
+ `datatipSetStruct`_ Stores the datatips data structure in the
  polyline entity.
+ `datatipSetStyle`_ Set the tip style for the given polyline
  datatips.
+ `datatipToggle`_ toggles the data tips mode.
+ `datatips`_ Tool for placing and editing tips along the plotted
  curves.
+ `orthProj`_ Computes the orthogonal projection of a point to a
  polyline in the plane.


.. _datatipSetDisplay: datatipSetDisplay.html
.. _datatipSetOrientation: datatipSetOrientation.html
.. _datatipRemove: datatipRemove.html
.. _datatipSetStyle: datatipSetStyle.html
.. _orthProj: orthProj.html
.. _datatipRedraw: datatipRedraw.html
.. _datatipCreate: datatipCreate.html
.. _datatipToggle: datatipToggle.html
.. _datatipManagerMode: datatipManagerMode.html
.. _datatipSetStruct: datatipSetStruct.html
.. _datatipMove: datatipMove.html
.. _datatipRemoveAll: datatipRemoveAll.html
.. _datatipSetInterp: datatipSetInterp.html
.. _datatipInitStruct: datatipInitStruct.html
.. _datatipGetEntities: datatipGetEntities.html
.. _datatipGetStruct: datatipGetStruct.html
.. _datatips: datatips.html


