


Strings
~~~~~~~


+ `ascii`_ string ascii conversions
+ `blanks`_ Create string of blank characters
+ `code2str`_ returns character string associated with Scilab integer
  codes. **This function is obsolete.**
+ `convstr`_ case conversion
+ `emptystr`_ zero length string
+ `eval`_ evaluation of a matrix of strings
+ `evstr`_ evaluation of expressions
+ `grep`_ find matches of a string in a vector of strings
+ `isalphanum`_ check that characters of a string are alphanumerics
+ `isascii`_ tests if character is a 7-bit US-ASCII character
+ `isdigit`_ check that characters of a string are digits between 0
  and 9
+ `isletter`_ check that characters of a string are alphabetics
  letters
+ `isnum`_ tests if a string represents a number
+ `justify`_ Justify character array.
+ `length`_ length of object
+ `part`_ extraction of strings
+ `regexp`_ find a substring that matches the regular expression
  string
+ `sci2exp`_ converts an expression to a string
+ `str2code`_ return scilab integer codes associated with a character
  string. **This function is obsolete.**
+ `strcat`_ concatenate character strings
+ `strchr`_ Find the first occurrence of a character in a string
+ `strcmp`_ compare character strings
+ `strcmpi`_ compare character strings (case independent)
+ `strcspn`_ Get span until character in string
+ `strindex`_ search position of a character string in an other
  string.
+ `string`_ conversion to string
+ `strings`_ Scilab Object, character strings
+ `stripblanks`_ Strips / trims leading and trailing blanks (and tabs)
  of strings
+ `strncpy`_ Copy characters from strings
+ `strrchr`_ Find the last occurrence of a character in a string
+ `strrev`_ returns string reversed
+ `strsplit`_ split a string into a vector of strings
+ `strspn`_ Get span of character set in string
+ `strstr`_ Locate substring
+ `strsubst`_ substitute a character string by another in a character
  string.
+ `strtod`_ Convert string to double.
+ `strtok`_ Split string into tokens
+ `tokenpos`_ returns the tokens positions in a character string.
+ `tokens`_ returns the tokens of a character string.
+ `tree2code`_ generates ascii definition of a Scilab function


.. _eval: eval.html
.. _isdigit: isdigit.html
.. _evstr: evstr.html
.. _regexp: regexp.html
.. _strrchr: strrchr.html
.. _string: string.html
.. _tree2code: tree2code.html
.. _isascii: isascii.html
.. _tokenpos: tokenpos.html
.. _isnum: isnum.html
.. _str2code: str2code.html
.. _strcat: strcat.html
.. _emptystr: emptystr.html
.. _strings: strings.html
.. _grep: grep.html
.. _justify: justify.html
.. _strsplit: strsplit.html
.. _strncpy: strncpy.html
.. _convstr: convstr.html
.. _isalphanum: isalphanum.html
.. _isletter: isletter.html
.. _strindex: strindex.html
.. _length: length.html
.. _sci2exp: sci2exp.html
.. _strtok: strtok.html
.. _strcspn: strcspn.html
.. _code2str: code2str.html
.. _strcmpi: strcmpi.html
.. _strtod: strtod.html
.. _strrev: strrev.html
.. _blanks: blanks.html
.. _strstr: strstr.html
.. _strchr: strchr.html
.. _part: part.html
.. _stripblanks: stripblanks.html
.. _strcmp: strcmp.html
.. _tokens: tokens.html
.. _strsubst: strsubst.html
.. _ascii: ascii.html
.. _strspn: strspn.html


