


console
=======

Keyboard Shortcuts in the Console Window



Description
~~~~~~~~~~~
UP or Ctrl+P recall previous line. DOWN or Ctrl+N recall next line. F1
call help. F2 clear console. F12 open console box only on Windows.
Ctrl+space or TAB completion : Scilab displays a list of all names
that start with somes characters. Ctrl + A or HOME move to beginning
of current line. Ctrl + B or LEFT moves the cursor one character to
the left. Ctrl + C interrupts Scilab if nothing selected in the
console, else text selected is sent to clipboard. Ctrl + D or DELETE
deletes the current character. Ctrl + E or END moves the cursor to the
end of command line. Ctrl + F or RIGHT moves the cursor one character
to the right. Ctrl + H or BACKSPACE deletes the previous character.
Ctrl + K kills command line from cursor to the end. Ctrl + S select
all. Ctrl + U delete the whole command line. Ctrl + V do a paste from
clipboard. Ctrl + W delete the last word of the command line. Ctrl + X
Interrupt Scilab Ctrl + LEFT move left one word. Ctrl + RIGHT move
right one word. Shift + HOME select from cursor to beginning of
statement. Shift + END select from cursor to end of statement. Double-
click select current word.


console cli
===========

Keyboard Shortcuts in NW/NWNI mode



Description
~~~~~~~~~~~
UP or Ctrl+P recall previous line. DOWN or Ctrl+N recall next line.
TAB completion : Scilab displays a list of all names that start with
somes characters. Ctrl + A or HOME move to beginning of current line.
Ctrl + B or LEFT moves the cursor one character to the left. Ctrl + D
or DELETE deletes the current character. Ctrl + E or END moves the
cursor to the end of command line. Ctrl + F or RIGHT moves the cursor
one character to the right. Ctrl + H or BACKSPACE deletes the previous
character. Ctrl + K kills command line from cursor to the end. Ctrl +
U kills command line from cursor to beginning. Ctrl + W delete the
previous word from the cursor. Alt+B or Ctrl+LEFT move left one word.
Alt+F or Ctrl+RIGHT move right one word.


