


Low level functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


+ `AssignOutputVariable`_ a C gateway function which specifies which
  parameters created inside the C gateway will be returned as an output
  argument into Scilab.
+ `CallOverloadFunction`_ a C gateway function uses to call overload
  function or macro
+ `CheckInputArgument`_ C function which checks the number of input
  arguments present in the calling Scilab function.
+ `CheckOutputArgument`_ C function which checks the number of output
  arguments present in the calling Scilab function.
+ `ReturnArguments`_ A C gateway function which returns the various
  variables.
+ `boolean_reading_API`_ How to read matrix of boolean.
+ `boolean_writing_API`_ How to write matrices of boolean.
+ `bsparse_reading_API`_ How to read boolean sparse in a gateway.
+ `bsparse_writing_API`_ How to add boolean sparse matrix in a
  gateway.
+ `check_matrix_dimension`_ A C gateway functions which check
  dimensions of a variable.
+ `Common_getvaraddr_API`_ How to get the address of an argument or a
  variable in a gateway.
+ `Common_getvardimension_API`_ How to get the dimensions of an
  argument or a variable stored as matrix.
+ `Common_getvartype_API`_ How to get the type of an argument or a
  variable within a gateway.
+ `Common_iscomplex_API`_ How to get the argument or variable
  complexity.
+ `Common_isvarmatrixtype_API`_ How to know if an argument or a
  variable is stored as a matrix.
+ `deleteNamedVariable`_ a C gateway function uses to delete a
  variable from name
+ `Double_management_reading_API`_ How to read matrices of double in a
  gateway.
+ `Double_management_writing_API`_ How to write matrices of doubles in
  a gateway.
+ `getNbInputArgument`_ A C gateway function which provides the number
  of input arguments present in the calling Scilab function
+ `getNbOutputArgument`_ A C gateway function which provides the
  number of output arguments present in the calling Scilab function
+ `int_getmatrixofintegerprecision_API`_ How to get precision of an
  integer matrix.
+ `Integer_management_reading_API`_ How to read matrices of integer in
  a gateway.
+ `Integer_management_writing_API`_ How to write matrices of integers
  in a gateway.
+ `Pointer_reading_API`_ How to read pointer in a gateway.
+ `Pointer_writing_API`_ How to write pointer in a gateway.
+ `poly_getpolyvariablename_API`_ How to get the symbolic variable
  name.
+ `Polynomial_management_reading_API`_ How to read matrices of
  polynomials in a gateway.
+ `Polynomial_management_writing_API`_ How to write matrices of
  polynomials in a gateway.
+ `Sparse_management_reading_API`_ How to read sparse matrices in a
  gateway.
+ `Sparse_management_writing_API`_ How to write sparse matrix in a
  gateway.
+ `String_management_reading_API`_ How to read matrices of strings in
  a gateway.
+ `String_management_writing_API`_ How to write matrices of string in
  a gateway.


.. _Pointer_writing_API: Pointer_writing_API.html
.. _CheckOutputArgument: CheckOutputArgument.html
.. _Integer_management_writing_API: Integer_management_writing_API.html
.. _deleteNamedVariable: deleteNamedVariable.html
.. _Common_getvartype_API: Common_getvartype_API.html
.. _boolean_reading_API: boolean_reading_API.html
.. _Double_management_reading_API: Double_management_reading_API.html
.. _Polynomial_management_reading_API: Polynomial_management_reading_API.html
.. _Common_getvaraddr_API: Common_getvaraddr_API.html
.. _Pointer_reading_API: Pointer_reading_API.html
.. _check_matrix_dimension: check_matrix_dimension.html
.. _Polynomial_management_writing_API: Polynomial_management_writing_API.html
.. _Common_isvarmatrixtype_API: Common_isvarmatrixtype_API.html
.. _Double_management_writing_API: Double_management_writing_API.html
.. _AssignOutputVariable: AssignOutputVariable.html
.. _Integer_management_reading_API: Integer_management_reading_API.html
.. _getNbOutputArgument: getNbOutputArgument.html
.. _Common_iscomplex_API: Common_iscomplex_API.html
.. _poly_getpolyvariablename_API: poly_getpolyvariablename_API.html
.. _bsparse_writing_API: bsparse_writing_API.html
.. _String_management_writing_API: String_management_writing_API.html
.. _ReturnArguments: ReturnArguments.html
.. _CheckInputArgument: CheckInputArgument.html
.. _int_getmatrixofintegerprecision_API: int_getmatrixofintegerprecision_API.html
.. _bsparse_reading_API: bsparse_reading_API.html
.. _getNbInputArgument: getNbInputArgument.html
.. _Common_getvardimension_API: Common_getvardimension_API.html
.. _boolean_writing_API: boolean_writing_API.html
.. _Sparse_management_writing_API: Sparse_management_writing_API.html
.. _CallOverloadFunction: CallOverloadFunction.html
.. _String_management_reading_API: String_management_reading_API.html
.. _Sparse_management_reading_API: Sparse_management_reading_API.html


